III Jonathan Harker's Journal Continued
When I found that I was a prisoner, a sort of wild feeling came over me. I rushed up and down
the stairs, trying every door and peering out of every window I could find. But after a little,
the conviction of my helplessness overpowered all other feelings. When I look back, after a
few hours, I think I must have been mad for the time, for I behaved much as a rat does in a trap.
When, however, the conviction had come to me that I was helpless, I sat down quietly,
as quietly as I have ever done anything in my life, and began to think over what was best to
be done. I am thinking still, and as yet have come to no definite conclusion. Of one thing only am I
that it is no use making my ideas known to the count. He knows well that I am imprisoned,
and as he has done it himself, and has doubtless his own motives for it, he would only deceive me
if I trusted him fully with the facts. So far as I can see, my only plan will be to keep my
knowledge and my fears to myself, and my eyes open. I am, I know, either being deceived,
like a baby, by my own fears, or else I am in desperate straits, and if the latter be so,
I need, and shall need, all my brains to get through. I had hardly come to this conclusion
when I heard the great door below shut, and knew that the Count had returned. He did not
come at once into the library, so I went cautiously to my own room and found him making the bed.
This was odd, but only confirmed what I had all along thought, that there are no servants
in the house. When later I saw him through the chink of the hinges of the door laying
the table in the dining-room, I was assured of it. For if he does himself all these menial
offices, surely it is proof that there is no one else in the castle. It must have been
the Count himself who was the driver of the coach that brought me here. This is a terrible
thought. For if so, what does it mean that he could control the wolves as he did, by
only holding up his hand for silence? How was it that all the people at Bistritz and
on the coach had some terrible fear for me? What meant the giving of the crucifix, of
the garlic, of the wild rose, of the mountain ash? Bless that good, good woman who hung
the crucifix round my neck! For it is a comfort and a strength to me whenever I touch it.
It is odd that a thing which I have been taught to regard with disfavour and as idolatrous
should in a time of loneliness and trouble be of help. Is it that there is something
in the essence of the thing itself, or that it is a medium, a tangible help, in conveying
memories of sympathy and comfort? Sometime, if it may be, I must examine this matter and
try to make up my mind about it. In the meantime I must find out all I can about Count Dracula,
as it may help me to understand. Tonight he may talk of himself, if I turn the conversation
that way. I must be very careful, however, not to awake his suspicion.
Midnight.
I've had a long talk with the Count. I asked him a few questions on Transylvania history,
and he warmed up to the subject wonderfully. In his speaking of things and people, and
especially of battles, he spoke as if he had been present at them all. This he afterwards
explained by saying that to a boyar the pride of his house and name is his own pride, that
their glory is his glory, that their fate is his fate. Whenever he spoke of his house
he always said we, and spoke almost in the plural, like a king speaking. I wish I could
put down all he said exactly as he said it, for to me it was most fascinating. It seemed
to have in it a whole history of the country. He grew excited as he spoke, and walked about
the room pulling his great white moustache, and grasping anything on which he laid his
hands as though he would crush it by main strength. One thing he said, which I shall
put down as nearly as I can, for it tells in its way the story of his race.
These Achilles have a right to be proud, for in our reigns flows the blood of many brave
races who fought as the lion fights for lordship. Here, in the whirlpool of European races, the
thunder and thunder gave them, which their berserkers displayed to such foul intent on
the seaboard of Europe, and of Asia and Africa too, till the peoples thought that the wervels
themselves had come. Here too, when they came, they found Sahans, whose warlike fury had
swept the earth like a living flame, till the dying peoples held it in their veins,
and the blood of those old witches who expelled from Scythia had mated with the devils in
the desert. Fools! Fools! What devil or what witch was ever so great as Attila, whose blood
is in these veins? He held up his arms. Is it a wonder that we were a conquering race?
That we were proud that when the Magyar, the Lombard, the Avvar, the Bolgar, or the Turk
poured his thousands on our frontiers that we drove them back? Is it strange that when
our path and his legions swept through the Hungarian fatherland, he found us here when
he reached the frontier, that the Honfoglalaz was completed there, and when the Hungarian
flood swept eastward, the Zekales were claimed as kindred by the victorious Magyars, and
who us for centuries was trusted to guarding of the frontier of Turkiland? Ay, and more
than that, endless duty of the frontier guard, for as the Turks say, water sleeps and the
enemy is sleepless. Who more gladly than we throughout the four nations received the bloody
sword, or at its warlike call flocked quicker to the standard of the king? When was redeemed
that great shame of my nation, the shame of Kosova, when the flags of the Valach and the
Magyar went down beneath the crescent? Who was it but one of my own race who as Voivode
crossed the Danube and beat the Turk on his own ground? This was a Dracula, indeed. Who
was it that his own unworthy brother, when he had fallen, sold his people to the Turk
and brought the shame of slavery on them? Was it not this Dracula, indeed, who inspired
that other of his race, who in a later age again and again brought his forces over the
great river into Turkiland, who when he was beaten back, came again and again, though
he had to come alone from the bloody field where his troops were being slaughtered, since
he knew that he alone could ultimately triumph? They said that he thought only of his own
self. Bah! What good are peasants without a leader? Where ends the war without a brain
and a heart to conduct it? Again, when after the battle of Mohaks they threw off the Hungarian
yoke, we of the Dracula blood were amongst their leaders, for our spirit would not brook
that we were not free. Ah, young sir, the Zechelis and the Dracula as their heart's
blood, their brains and their swords, can boast a record that mushroom growths like
the Habsburgs and the Romanovs could never reach. The warlike days are over. Blood is
too precious a thing in these days of dishonorable peace, and the glories of the great race,
the vices, are as a tale that is told.
It was by this time close on morning, and we went to bed. Memorandum. This diary seems
horribly like the beginning of the Arabian Nights, for everything has to break off at
cock-crow or like the ghost of Hamlet's father.
12th of May. Let me begin with facts. Bare, meager facts, verified by books and figures,
and of which there can be no doubt. I must not confuse them with experiences which will
have to rest on my own observation or my memory of them. Last evening, when the Count came
from his room, he began by asking me questions on legal matters and on the doings of certain
kinds of business. I had spent the day wearily over books, and, simply to keep my mind occupied,
went over some of the matters I had been examined in at Lincoln's Inn. There was a certain method
in the Count's inquiries, so I shall try to put them down in sequence. The knowledge may
somehow, or some time, be useful to me.
First, he asked if a man in England might have two solicitors or more. I told him he
might have a dozen if he wished, but that it would not be wise to have more than one
solicitor engaged in one transaction, as only one could act at a time, and that the change
would be certain to militate against his interest. He seemed thoroughly to understand, and went
on to ask if there would be any practical difficulty in having one man to attend, say,
to banking, and another to look after shipping, in case local help were needed in a place
far from home of the banking solicitor. I asked him to explain more fully, so that I
might not by any chance mislead him. So he said,
I shall illustrate. Your friend and mine, Mr. Peter Hawkins, from under the shadow of
your beautiful cathedral at Exeter, which is far from London, buys for me through your
good self my place at London. Now here let me say frankly, lest you should think it strange
that I have sought the services of one so far off from London instead of some one resident
there, that my motive was that no local interest might be served save my wish only, and as
one of London residents might perhaps have some purpose of himself or friend to serve.
I went thus afield to seek my agent, whose labor should be only to my interest.
Now suppose I, who have much of affairs, wish to ship goods, say, to Newcastle or Durham
or Harwich or Dover. Might it not be that it could be with more ease be done by consigning
to one in these ports? I answered that certainly it would be most easy, but that we solicitors
had a system of agency, one for the other, so that local work could be done locally on
instruction from any solicitor, so that the client simply by placing himself in the hands
of one man could have his wishes carried out by him without further trouble.
But, said he, I could be at liberty to direct myself. Is it not so?
Of course, I replied, and such is often done by men of business, who do not like the whole
of their affairs to be known by any one person.
Good, he said, and then went on to ask about the means of making consignments and the forms
to be gone through, and of all sorts of difficulties which might arise, but by forethought could
be guarded against. I explained all these things to him to the best of my ability, and
he certainly left me under the impression that he would have made a wonderful solicitor.
For there was nothing that he did not think of or foresee. For a man who was never in
the country, and who did not evidently do much in the way of business, his knowledge
and acumen were wonderful. When he had satisfied himself on these points
on which he had spoken, and I had verified all as well as I could by the books available,
he suddenly stood up and said,
Have you written since your first letter to our friend Mr. Peter Hawkins, or to any other?
It was with some bitterness in my heart that I answered that I had not, that as yet I had
not seen any opportunity of sending letters to anybody.
Then right now, my young friend, he said, laying a heavy hand on my shoulder, write
to our friend, and to any other, and say, if it will please you, that you shall stay
with me until a month from now.
Do you wish me to stay so long? I asked, for my heart grew cold at the thought.
I desire it much. Nay, I will take no refusal.
When your master, employer, what you will, engaged that someone should come on his behalf,
it was understood that my needs only were to be consulted.
I have not stinted. Is it not so?
What could I do but bow acceptance? It was Mr. Hawkins' interest, not mine, and I had
to think of him not myself and besides, while Count Dracula was speaking. There was that
in his eyes and in his bearing, which made me remember that I was a prisoner, and that
if I wished it, I could have no choice.
The Count saw his victory in my bow, and his mastery in the trouble of my face, for he
began at once to use them, but in his own smooth, resistless way.
I pray you, my good young friend, that you will not discourse of things other than business
in your letters. It will doubtless please your friends to know that you are well and
that you look forward to getting home to them. Is it not so? As he spoke, he handed me three
sheets of notepaper and three envelopes. They were all the thinnest foreign post, and looking
at them, then at him, and noticing his quiet smile with the sharp canine teeth lying over
the red underlip, I understood as well as if he had spoken that I should be more careful
what I wrote, for he would be able to read it.
So I determined to write only formal notes now, but to write fully to Mr. Hawkins in
secret, and also to Mina, for to her I could write shorthand which would puzzle the Count,
if he did see it. When I had written my two letters I sat quiet, reading a book, whilst
the Count wrote several notes, referring, as he wrote them, to some books on his table.
Then he took up my two and placed them with his own, and put by his writing materials,
after which, the instant the door had closed behind him, I leaned over and looked at the
letters, which were face down on the table. I felt no compunction in doing so, for under
the circumstances I felt that I should protect myself in every way I could.
One of the letters was directed to Samuel F. Billington, No. 7, the Crescent, Whitby.
Another to Herr Lütner, Varna. The third was to Coots & Company, London, and the fourth
to Herren Klopstock & Bilruth, Bankers, Budapest. The second and fourth were unsealed. I was
having just had time to resume my book before the Count, holding still another letter in
his hand, entered the room. He took up the letters on the table and stamped them carefully,
and then turning to me, said,
I trust you will forgive me, but I have much work to do in private this evening. You will,
I hope, find all things as you wish.
At the door he turned, and after a moment's pause said,
Let me advise you, my dear young friend, Nay, let me warn you, with all seriousness, that
should you leave these rooms, you will not by any chance go to sleep in any other part
of the castle. It is old and has many memories, and there are bad dreams for those who sleep
unwisely. Be warned. Should sleep now or ever overcome you, or be like to do, then haste
to your own chamber or to these rooms, for your rest will then be safe. But if you be
not careful in this respect, then...
He finished his speech in a gruesome way, for he motioned with his hands as if he were
washing them. I quite understood. My only doubt was as to whether any dream could be
more terrible than the unnaturable, horrible net of gloom and mystery which seemed closing
around me.
Later, I endorsed the last words written, but this time there is no doubt in question.
I shall not fear to sleep in any place where he is not. I have placed the crucifix over
the head of my bed. I imagine that my rest is thus freer from dreams, and there it shall
remain.
When he left me I went to my room. After a little while, not hearing any sound, I came
out and went up the stone stair to where I could look out towards the south. There was
some sense of freedom in the vast expanse. Inaccessible though it was to me, as compared
with the narrow darkness of the courtyard.
Looking out on this, I felt that I was indeed in prison, and I seemed to want a breath of
fresh air, though it were of the night. I am beginning to feel this nocturnal existence
tell on me. It is destroying my nerve. I start at my own shadow and am full of all sorts
of horrible imaginings. God knows that there is ground for my terrible fear in this accursed
place.
I looked out over the beautiful expanse, bathed in soft yellow moonlight till it was almost
as light as day. In the soft light the distant hills became melted, and the shadows in the
valleys and gorges of velvety blackness. The mere beauty seemed to cheer me. There was
peace and comfort in every breath I drew.
As I leaned from the window my eye was caught by something moving a story below me and somewhat
to my left, where I imagined, from the order of the rooms, that the windows of the Count's
Stone Room would look out. The window at which I stood was tall and deep, stone mullioned,
and though weather-worn was still complete. But it was evidently many a day since the
case had been there. I drew back behind the stonework and looked carefully out. What I
knew the man by the neck and the movement of his back and arms. In any case I could
not mistake the hands which I had some many opportunities of studying. I was at first
interested and somewhat amused, or it is wonderful how small a matter will interest and amuse
a man when he is a prisoner. But my very feelings changed to repulsion and terror. I was not
when I saw the whole man slowly emerge from the window and begin to crawl down the castle
wall over the dreadful abyss, face down with his cloak spreading out around him like great
wings. At first I could not believe my eyes. I thought it was some trick of the moonlight,
and some weird effect of shadow. But I kept looking, and it could be no delusion. I saw
the fingers and toes grasp the corners of the stones, worn clear of the mortar by the
stress of years, and by thus using every projection and inequality move downwards with considerable
speed, just as a lizard moves along a wall. What manner of man is this, or what manner
of creature is it in the semblance of man? I feel the dread of this horrible place overpowering
me. I am in fear, in awful fear, and there is no escape for me.
I am encompassed about with terrors that I dare not think of.
Once more I have seen the Count go out in his lizard fashion. He moved downwards in
a side-long way, some hundred feet down and a good deal to the left. He vanished into
some hole or window. When his head had disappeared I leaned out to try and see more but without
a veil. The distance was too great to allow a proper angle of sight. I knew he had left
the castle now, and thought to use the opportunity to explore more than I had dared to do as
yet. I went back to the room, and taking a lamp, tried all the doors. They were all locked,
as I had expected, and the locks were comparatively new. But I went down the stone stairs to the
hall where I had entered originally. I found I could pull back the bolts easily enough
and unhook the great chains. But the door was locked, and the key was gone. That key
must be in the Count's room. I must watch, should his door be unlocked, so that I may
get it and escape. I went on to make a thorough examination of the various stairs and passages,
and to try the doors that opened from them. One or two small rooms near the hall were
open, but there was nothing to see in them except old furniture, dusty with age and moth-eaten.
At last, however, I found one door at the top of the stairway which, though it seemed
locked, gave a little under pressure. I tried it harder, and found that it was not really
locked, but that the resistance came from the fact that the hinges had fallen somewhat,
and the heavy door rested on the floor. Here was an opportunity which I might not have
again, so I exerted myself, and with many efforts forced it back so that I could enter.
I was now on a wing of the castle, further to the right than the rooms I knew, and a
story lower down. From the windows I could see that the suite of rooms lay along to the
south of the castle, the windows of the end-room looking out both west and south.
On the latter side, as well as to the former, there was a great precipice. The castle was
built on the corner of a great rock, so that on three sides it was quite impregnable. And
great windows were placed here, where sling or bow or culverine could not reach, and consequently
light and comfort, impossible to a position which had to be guarded, were secured. To
the west was a great valley, and then rising far away great jagged mountain fastnesses
rising peak on peak, the sheer rock studded with mountain ash and thorn, whose roots clung
in cracks and crevices and crannies of the stone. This was evidently the portion of the
castle occupied by the ladies in bygone days, for the furniture had more an air of comfort
than any I had seen. The windows were curtainless, and the yellow
moonlight, flooding in through the diamond panes, enabled one to see even colours, whilst
it softened the wealth of dust which lay over all and disguised in some measure the ravages
of time and moth. My lamp seemed to be of little effect in the brilliant moonlight,
but I was glad to have it with me, for there was a dreadful loneliness in the place which
chilled my heart and made my nerves tremble. Still, it was better than living alone in
the rooms which I had come to hate from the presence of the Count, and after trying a
little to school my nerves, I found a soft quietude come over me.
Here I am, sitting at a little oak table, where in old times possibly some fair lady
sat to pen, with much thought and many blushes, her ill-spelt love-letter, and writing in
my diary in shorthand all that has happened since I closed it last. It is the nineteenth
century, up to date with a vengeance, and yet, unless my senses deceive me, the old
centuries had, and have, powers of their own which mere modernity cannot kill.
Later, the morning of sixteenth May, God preserve my sanity, for to this I am reduced.
Safety, and the assurance of safety, are things of the past. Whilst I live on here, there
is but one thing to hope for, that I may not go mad, if indeed I be not mad already. If
I be sane, and surely it is maddening to think that of all the foul things that lurk in this
hateful place, the Count is the least dreadful to me, that to him alone I can look for safety,
even though this be only whilst I can serve his purpose. Great God! Merciful God! Let
me be calm, for out of that way lies madness indeed.
I begin to get new lights on certain things which have puzzled me. Up to now I never quite
knew what Shakespeare meant when he made Hamlet say, My tablets, quick, my tablets, tis meat
that I put it down, etc. For now, feeling as though my own brain were unhinged, or
as if the shock had come which must end in its undoing, I turn to my diary for repose.
The habit of entering accurately must help to soothe me.
The Count's mysterious warning frightened me at the time. It frightens me more now when
I think of it, for in the future he has a fearful hold upon me. I shall fear to doubt
what he may say.
When I had written in my diary, and had fortunately replaced the book and pen in my pocket, I
felt sleepy. The Count's warning came into my mind, but I took pleasure in disobeying
it. The sense of sleep was upon me, and with it the obstinacy which sleep brings as outrider.
The soft moonlight soothed, and the wide expanse without gave a sense of freedom which refreshed
me. I determined not to return to-night to the gloom-haunted rooms, but to sleep here,
where of old ladies had sat and sung and lived sweet lives whilst their gentle breasts were
sad for their menfolk away in the midst of remorseless wars. I drew a great couch out
of its place near the corner, so that as I lay I could look at the lovely view to east
and south, and unthinking of and uncaring for the dust, compose myself for sleep. I
suppose I must have fallen asleep. I hope so, but I fear, for all that followed was
startlingly real, so real that now sitting here in the broad full sunlight of the morning
I cannot in the least believe that it was all sleep. I was not alone. The room was the
same, unchanged in any way since I came into it. I could see along the floor, in the brilliant
moonlight, my own footsteps marked where I had disturbed the long accumulation of dust.
In the moonlight opposite me were three young women, ladies by their dress and manner. I
thought at the time that I must be dreaming when I saw them. They threw no shadow on the
floor. They came close to me and looked at me for some time, and then whispered together.
Two were dark, and had high aquiline noses, like the Count, and great, dark, piercing
eyes that seemed to be almost red when contrasted with the pale yellow moon. The other was fair,
as fair as can be, with great masses of golden hair and eyes like pale gold. I could not
feel sapphires. I seemed somehow to know her face, and to know it in connection with some
dreamy fear, but I could not recollect at the moment how or where. All three had brilliant
white teeth that shone like pearls against the ruby of their voluptuous lips.
There was something about them that made me uneasy, some longing, at the same time some
deadly fear. I felt in my heart a wicked, burning desire that they would kiss me with
those red lips. It is not good to note this down, lest some day it should meet Mina's
eyes and cause her pain, but it is the truth. They whispered together, and then they all
three laughed. Such a silvery musical laugh, but as hard as though the sound never could
have come through the softness of human lips. It was like the intolerable, tingling sweetness
of water-glasses when played on by a cunning hand. The fair girl shook her head coquettishly,
and the other two urged her on. One said,
Go on. You are the first. We shall follow. Yours is the right to begin.
The other added, He is young and strong. There are kisses for us all.
I lay quiet, looking out from under my eyelashes in an agony of delightful anticipation. The
fair girl advanced and bent over me till I could feel the movement of her breath upon
me. Sweet it was in one sense, honey sweet, and
sent the same tingling through the nerves as her voice, but with a bitter underlying
the sweet, a bitter offensiveness as one smells in blood.
I was afraid to raise my eyelids, but looked out and saw perfectly under the lashes. The
girl went on her knees and bent over me, simply gloating. There was a deliberate sense of
voluptuousness which was both thrilling and repulsive, and as she arched her neck she
actually licked her lips like an animal, till I could see in the moonlight the moisture
shining on the scarlet lips and on the red tongue as it lapped the white lips.
Sweet, sharp teeth. Lower and lower went her head as the lips went below the range of my
mouth and chin and seemed to fasten on my throat.
Then she paused, and I could hear the churning sound of her tongue as it licked her lips
and teeth, and I could feel the hot breath on my neck.
Then the skin of my throat began to tingle as one's flesh does when the hand that is
to tickle it approaches nearer, nearer. I could feel the soft, shivering touch of her
lips on the super-sensitive skin of my throat, and the hard dents of two sharp teeth just
touching and pausing there. I closed my eyes in languorous ecstasy, and when I saw her
I waited, waited with beating heart. But at that instant another sensation swept through
me as quick as lightning. I was conscious of the presence of the Count and of his being
as if I lapped in a storm of fury. As my eyes opened involuntarily I saw something
his strong hand grasp the slender neck of the fair woman, and with giant's power drawed
back, the blue eyes transformed with fury, the white teeth champing with rage, and the
fair cheeks blazing red with passion. But the Count, never did I imagine such wrath
and fury even to the demons of the pit. His eyes were positively blazing. The red light
in them was lurid as if the flames of hell-fire blazed behind them. His face was deathly pale,
and the lines of it were hard like drawn wires. The thick eyebrows that met over the nose
now seemed like a heaving bar of white-hot metal. With a fierce sweep of his arm he hurled
the woman from him, and then motioned to the others as though he were beating them back.
It was the same imperious gesture that I had seen used to the wolves, in a voice which
though low and almost in a whisper seemed to cut through the air and then ring in the
room, he said, How dare you touch him, any of you! How dare you cast eyes on him when
I have forbidden it! Back, I tell you all! This man is not a wolf. He is not a wolf.
This man belongs to me. Beware how you meddle with him, or you'll have to deal with me.
The fair girl, with a laugh of ribald coquetry, turned to answer him, You yourself never loved,
you never love. On this the other women joined, and such a mirthless, hard, soulless laughter
rang through the room that it almost made me faint to hear. It seemed like the pleasure
of fiends. Then the count turned, after looking at my face attentively and said in a soft
whisper, Yes, I too can love. You yourselves can tell it from the past. Is it not so? Well,
now I promise you that when I am done with him, you shall kiss him at your will. Now
go, go! I must have vacant him, for there is work to be done.
Are we to have nothing tonight? said one of them, with a low laugh, as she pointed to
the bag which he had thrown upon the floor, and which moved as though there were some
living thing within it. For answer he nodded his head. One of the women jumped forward
and opened it. If my ears did not deceive me, there was a gasp and a low wail as of
a half-smothered child. The women closed round, whilst I was aghast with horror.
But as I looked, they disappeared, and with them that dreadful bag. There was no door
near them, and they could not have passed me without my noticing. They simply seemed
to fade into the rays of the moonlight and pass out through the window, for I could see
outside the dim, shadowy forms for a moment, before they entirely faded away. Then the
horror overcame me, and I sank down, unconscious.